JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
President Obama says world
leaders are rattled
by the newly named Republican
nominee -- a
look at the international
response to Donald
Trump's success.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Thursday:
rebuilding Ecuador -- a month
after a devastating
earthquake flattened buildings
and left thousands
homeless, how the country is
recovering.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we get a
backstage pass
to one of the nation's top music
venues, the
9:30 Club, the spot for a new
music variety
show.
SETH HURWITZ, Co-Owner, 9:30
Club: We really
are curating this for everyone.
I have this
fantasy vision of three
generations sitting
around at the couch because
"Live at 9:30"
is coming on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump has
now cemented
his status as the Republican
presidential
standard=bearer in the fall. He
clinched the
delegates needed for the
nomination today,
even as he took fire from the
man who holds
the job now.
John Yang begins our coverage.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
The folks behind me got us right
over the
top, from North Dakota.
JOHN YANG: Literally backed by
his North Dakota
delegates, Donald Trump
celebrated his status
as the now certain nominee at a
news conference
in Bismarck.
The Associated Press reports
that one of those
delegates gave him the 1,237
vote he needs
to win on the first ballot at
the Republican
Convention. It came on the same
day that President
Obama used his own news
conference at the
G7 Summit in Japan to say that
world leaders
are worried about a Trump
presidency.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
They're rattled by him, and for
good reason,
because a lot of the proposals
that he has
made display either ignorance of
world affairs
or a cavalier attitude or an
interest in getting
tweets and headlines.
JOHN YANG: Trump dismissed the
president's
criticism.
DONALD TRUMP: Many of our -- the
countries
in our world, our beautiful
world, have been
absolutely abusing us and taking
advantage
of us. So, if they're rattled in
a friendly
way, we are going to have great
relationships
with these countries.
But if they're rattled in a
friendly way,
that's a good thing, John, not a
bad thing.
JOHN YANG: Even as he clinched
the nomination,
Trump faces more turmoil within
his campaign
staff. His national political
director, Rick
Wiley is out, just six weeks
after he was
brought on to help
professionalize the Trump
effort.
In a statement last night, the
campaign insisted
that Wiley was always a
short-term hire.
Trump seemed delighted by the
fact that his
nomination, once thought
improbable, was decided
before the Democrats.
DONALD TRUMP: And here I am
watching Hillary
fight, and she can't close the
deal.
JOHN YANG: In fact, Hillary
Clinton is within
78 delegates of locking up her
party's nomination,
but a new poll shows her in a
virtual tie
with Bernie Sanders in the
California primary
less than two weeks away.
Today, Clinton reacted to Trump
going over
the top.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
That means an unqualified loose
canon is within
reach of the most powerful job
in the world.
JOHN YANG: Clinton also
dismissed a State
Department watchdog report that
found she
violated policy by using a
private e-mail
server as secretary of state.
She told a Univision
affiliate last night, "I will
continue to
be open, and it's not an issue
that's going
to affect either the campaign or
my presidency."
JIMMY KIMMEL, Host, "Jimmy
Kimmel Live": Here's
the question from Bernie.
JOHN YANG: Sanders, meanwhile,
used late-night
talk show host Jimmy Kimmel to
challenge Trump
to a debate. Trump says he'd do
it for a price.
DONALD TRUMP: Oh, I would love
to debate Bernie.
He's a dream. Well, I said --
and I said last
night on Jimmy's show -- the
question that
was posed, I said I would love
to debate him,
but I want a lot of money to be
put up for
charity. So, what we will do is,
if we can
raise for by women's health
issues or something.
QUESTION: If you raise $10
million, you will
get on a debate stage with
Bernie Sanders?
DONALD TRUMP: I would love to,
yes.
JOHN YANG: Today, Sanders says
he can't wait.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
And I'm very excited about it,
and I think
we're going to st going to rent
out the largest
stadium you have here in
California.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Sanders had asked
Clinton to debate,
but she declined.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will focus on
how foreign
leaders are reacting to the rise
of Donald
Trump after the news summary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
A fight over LGBT rights sank a
major energy
spending bill in the U.S. House.
Last night,
Democrats attached an amendment
that bars
discrimination by federal
contractors. Today,
Republican conservatives
overwhelmingly voted
against the overall bill.
Most Democrats did as well, over
a separate
provision that defends North
Carolina's law
against transgender bathrooms.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congress came
under new pressure
today to approve funding for
fighting Zika.
The head of the Centers for
Disease Control
and Prevention spoke in
Washington, as lawmakers
began a two-week Memorial Day
recess.
Dr. Tom Frieden urged action to
protect pregnant
women from infections that can
cause birth
defects.
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN, Director,
Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention:
We have a
narrow window of opportunity to
scale up effective
Zika prevention measures, and
that window
of opportunity is closing.
Congress did the
right thing with Ebola. And I
hope in the
end they will do the right thing
with Zika.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
is asking for
$1.9 billion to fight Zika. The
Senate has
approved $1.1 billion. The House
voted for
$622 million.
HARI SREENIVASAN: More than
4,000 migrants
were rescued in the
Mediterranean Sea today,
as calmer weather brought more
sailings and
sinkings. They were trying to
reach Italy
from Libya just one day after
hundreds died
trying to make the journey.
Matt Frei of Independent
Television News narrates
our report.
MATT FREI: What actually happens
when a migrant
boat sinks in the Med? This is
what happens,
filmed yesterday in searing
silence by the
CCTV camera of an Italian navy
ship.
The naval ship has sent a small
advance boat.
It takes away a handful of those
on board.
Ten minutes later, with the
prospect of a
rescue for everyone, the
passengers on deck
have started to move, first to
one side, then
to the other.
This is their fatal mistake.
This is what
happens far too often. Within
seconds, the
fishing boat carrying at least
570 people
lists and now turns over. What
should be a
rescue is turning into mayhem
and tragedy.
At least seven people have
drowned, but no
one can be sure how many more
are trapped
in the hull or, indeed, how many
of them can
swim.
That was yesterday. This was
today, another
sinking off the coast of Libya.
Here, at least
20 drowned. Every week,
sometimes every day,
another boat without a name
sinks in the Med.
The people who survived this
disaster looked
as if they were many Arab, not
African. They
arrived in Sicily this
afternoon, and if it
turns out that they were from
Syria, they
will be classified as refugees
and they will
probably be allowed to stay in
Europe, but
a Europe that is less and less
willing to
take them in, despite their many
ordeals.
Since Monday, 6,000 lives have
been saved,
but we have no idea whether the
number of
coffins represents the true
number of those
who have died.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The waters
between Libya
and Italy have become the focus
of migrant
attempts, now that the route
from Turkey to
Greece is largely closed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Violence
escalated in France
today as labor protests gripped
the country.
Clashes erupted in Paris between
demonstrators
and police, who fired tear gas
to disperse
the crowds. Thousands of union
members also
marched in the port city of Le
Havre. The
strikes have choked off much of
France's fuel
supply. At issue is the
government's plan
to make the workweek longer and
layoffs easier.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A dire warning
today for
the world's top economies.
Japan's Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe told his fellow
leaders that conditions
now resemble those before the
2008 financial
meltdown. He spoke at a Group of
Seven Summit
in Japan, and said his
counterparts agreed
on the need for new stimulus
efforts.
SHINZO ABE, Japanese Prime
Minister (through
translator): We rigorously
debated the global
economy this time, and we agree
it faces a
great risk at this moment. It
was a great
achievement that we were able to
put together
and agree to an economic
initiative to face
those very risks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A top aide to
Abe said later
that G7 nations will decide on
their own about
the timing and size of any
stimulus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, new federal
guidelines issued today aim to
give states
more flexibility in identifying
failing schools.
The Department of Education is
proposing the
decision be based on a mix of
test scores,
academic growth and absenteeism.
Last year, Congress revamped the
No Child
Left Behind Act to give states
more control
over education policy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Baylor
University confirms
that Kenneth Starr is out as
president for
failing to do more about sexual
abuse complaints
against football players. The
school also
fired head football coach Art
Briles today.
Starr is being demoted to
chancellor. He's
the former independent
prosecutor who investigated
President Clinton in the '90s.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street put
up mixed results
today. The Dow Jones industrial
average lost
23 points to close at 17828. The
Nasdaq rose
nearly seven points, and the S&P
500 fell
a fraction.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the
nation's Memorial
Day observances opened today,
with an event
known as Flags In. At Arlington
National Cemetery,
outside Washington, some 1,000
soldiers placed
American flags on more than
230,000 grave
sites of fallen service men and
women. The
flags will be removed after
Monday.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what the
rest of the world thinks of
Donald Trump;
how preparing for a volcanic
eruption helped
Ecuador respond to another
disaster; researchers
find a superbug resistant to all
antibiotics
in a patient in Pennsylvania;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn back to
the race for
the White House. But, tonight,
we get some
global insight into how Donald
Trump's rise
to become the presumptive
Republican Party
nominee for president is seen
around the world.
For that, we're joined by Geoff
Dyer. He's
U.S. diplomatic correspondent
for The Financial
Times. He has reported from
London and used
to be his paper's Beijing bureau
chief. Joyce
Karam is Washington bureau chief
for the Pan-Arab
newspaper Al-Hayat. And Alan
Gomez focuses
on Latin America and immigration
issues, among
other things, for USA Today.
And we welcome all three of you
to the "NewsHour."
Thank you for being here.
ALAN GOMEZ, USA Today: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Geoff Dyer,
let me start
with you. As we said, you have
reported from
Europe. You are based in the
U.S. now, but
you have also reported from
Asia.
But let's start with Europe. We
heard the
president's comments today. He
said world
leaders are rattled by what
they're hearing
from Donald Trump. Donald Trump
said it's
good that people are rattled.
What are you
seeing, what are you hearing
from the Europeans?
GEOFF DYER, The Financial Times:
Well, we're
in quite an extraordinary
position, where
several European leaders have
come out publicly
criticizing one of the main
candidates to
be the president of the United
States.
That is a very, very rare thing.
That doesn't
happen very often. David
Cameron, the British
prime minister, has called
Donald Trump's
plan to ban Muslims divisive and
stupid. Matteo
Renzi, the Italian prime
minister, has said
he would vote for Hillary
Clinton.
Even Angela Merkel, who has been
a bit more
diplomat, has gone out of her
way to say how
much she admires and likes
working with Hillary
Clinton. This is a very, very
unusual situation.
Politicians are not usually so
critical of
one of main candidates.
I think, for the Europeans,
there are three
main things. There is the ban on
Muslim that
Donald Trump has proposed, where
a lot of
European politicians would say
this is stimulating,
encouraging, giving a propaganda
victory to
ISIS.
There's comments about NATO,
where he said
that potentially maybe perhaps
the U.S. should
pull out of NATO in some way.
That has also
obviously got the Europeans very
worried,
especially at a time when
they're looking
anxiously at Vladimir Putin and
Russia.
And then his comments that he
would tear up
the Paris climate change accord
from last
year, this is something that
most European
governments are fairly strongly
supportive
of. And it has got them very
worried.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But at the same
time, this
administration, the Obama
administration,
hasn't been universally loved by
many of these
leaders, has it?
GEOFF DYER: That's fair to say
as well, though
Obama is still pretty popular in
Europe, and
he went to London recently and
had quite a
significant intervention into
the British
debate about whether to stay
within the European
Union.
He wouldn't have been invited if
he wasn't
still quite popular there. But
he's also said
some things that are quite
critical about
NATO as well. He and a lot other
American
politicians have said that
European governments
should spend more money on NATO,
that they
need to increase their defense
spending.
And that's been part of Donald
Trump's message,
but he's gone one step further,
and essentially
raised the idea of maybe the
U.S. should pull
out of NATO in some way. And
that's really
a much bigger step.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Joyce Karam, I
know it's hard
to talk about the entire Middle
East, because
there are so many different
countries and
so many different sets of
interests, but based
on your reporting, how would you
say leaders
in that part of the world are
looking at this
election and looking at Donald
Trump?
JOYCE KARAM, Al-Hayat: I mean,
Judy, look,
when Donald Trump announced his
candidacy,
many of these leaders know
Donald Trump. They
have dealt with him. They have
done business
with him.
A Trump Hotel is to waiting to
open in Doha
next year. So they know him on
the personal
level. But I think the rhetoric
that was heard
from the campaign of Donald
Trump, the ban
on Muslims, reinstituting
torture, this all
is fueling a level of anti-Trump
mood in the
Middle East.
People went from being
bewildered and perplexed
by Donald Trump's rise in
American politics
to being alarmed and terrified
today. Is he
really going to take the oil
from Iraq? Is
he really going to bomb ISIS
families? Is
he going to ban Muslims from
entering the
United States?
These are all valid questions
that you hear
them in Dubai and Beirut,
wherever you go
around the Middle East. So there
is a sense
of high concern that America
that many Arabs
love and admire has changed. And
what to expect
next, it's a big open question.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He's also talked,
as we know,
about undoing the Iran nuclear
treaty. He
has sounded, I think, for the
most part pretty
pro-Israel, wanting to support
Israel's defenses.
How is that seen?
JOYCE KARAM: That also is not
sinking well
with Middle Easterners, with the
Arab street.
For me, growing up in Lebanon,
seeing how
America is portrayed, Donald
Trump is confirming
the Arabs' worst fears about the
United States,
about the U.S. policy. We hear
conspiracies
in the Middle East, that the
U.S. is very
pro-Israel, doesn't care about
the Palestinians,
the U.S. is in the Middle East
to take the
oil, the U.S. is greedy and
imperial.
Unfortunately, this is -- today,
it matches
the rhetoric we hear from Donald
Trump. Will
Donald Trump change as a
president? Perhaps,
but, for now, that's what Arabs
are hearing
and reacting to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Alan Gomez, let's
talk about
Latin America.
We have already heard reactions
just now from
Joyce and Geoff, from the other
parts of the
world, about his comments about
Muslims. But
what about that other border
that he has talked
so much about, about building
the wall, about
Mexicans and others from Central
America coming
across the border, being
criminals, murderers,
rapists, and so forth? How would
you characterize
the reactions to him south of
the border?
ALAN GOMEZ, USA Today: Yes. The
reactions
have been pretty
well-established since he
originally made those comments
way back last
summer, when he was announcing
for president.
That speech that he gave where
he talked about
drug dealers and rapists coming
from Mexico
into the U.S. pretty much shored
up the opinion
of Donald Trump throughout Latin
America,
because even though he was
talking specifically
about Mexico there, I think
Latin Americans
took it as a collective insult.
And so you had the Nicaraguan
president talking
about that this -- Donald
Trump's rhetoric
being racist and warlike. You
had Mexican
President Enrique Pena Nieto
likening Trump's
rise to that of Mussolini and
Hitler. And
that's really permeated
throughout all levels
of Latin America, from
government down to
the people.
Now, I can tell you, it's gotten
to the point
that it's almost a running joke
throughout
the region. In Argentina
recently, they have
been airing TV ads where they're
showing clips
of Donald Trump's speeches
talking about building
that border wall, protecting the
Americans
from foreigners and
interspersing that with
images of Argentina's soccer
team and saying,
hey, they're on their way up
here to play
in Copa America, a soccer
tournament in the
U.S. next month, and saying,
yes, they should
be worried about us.
So, it's gotten to the point
that it's almost
a joke at this point how he's
viewed by Latin
Americans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I know. And it's
very tough
to cover every part of the world
in just a
few minutes.
But, Geoff Dyer, let me come
back to you and
ask you about Asia. That's where
President
Obama is right now. It's where
all this has
risen. Of course, Donald Trump
has spent a
lot of time talking about the
Chinese and
how they're taking the Americans
for granted,
getting the benefit of trade
deals.
What's the view of him on the
Asian continent?
GEOFF DYER: I suspect the
Chinese are a little
bit ambivalent. Donald Trump has
talked about
starting a trade war and
imposing tariffs
on China.
He's also made some comments
about maybe stealing
or taking some of these manmade
islands in
the South China Sea that China
has been militarizing,
that we will have got their
attention. But,
at the same time, the Chinese
are very suspicious
of Hillary Clinton. They see her
as the person
within the Obama administration
when she was
secretary of state in his first
term who effectively
encouraged the administration to
take a much
more aggressive approach towards
China.
So they're not big fans of
Hillary Clinton
either. I think, within Asia,
the big reaction
has been from the Japanese and
the South Koreans,
who are America's key allies in
the region.
And Donald Trump has said that
he might consider
pulling troops out of both of
those countries,
Americans troops out of those
countries, and
also said that maybe it's a good
idea for
them to have nuclear weapons.
Both of those ideas would
completely overturn
the basic understandings in
those countries,
how they manage their security,
how they think
about their future in the next
couple of decades.
So, these are not sort of minor
things. These
are huge deals for those
countries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In just the very
short time
we have left, Joyce Karam, views
of Hillary
Clinton, Middle East?
JOYCE KARAM: I think Hillary
Clinton is a
known quantity in the Middle
East.
They know the name. The name
recognition is
big in the GCC countries and
across the region.
They know some of her advisers,
people that
she would bring if she's to be
president.
With Donald Trump, you have the
opposite problem.
We know from Secretary Clinton's
trips to
the region that she held very
long meetings.
She would be well-received in
Saudi and other
places.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Alan Gomez, and
Hillary Clinton,
view of her in Latin America?
ALAN GOMEZ: It's interesting.
Hispanics in the U.S. actually
have a very
good view of Hillary Clinton,
because she
has already said that she would
continue President
Obama's programs and expand his
programs to
protect undocumented immigrants
from deportation.
Once you get into Latin America,
things get
a little bit trickier because of
her tenure
as secretary of state. In
Honduras, a lot
of people are still upset that
she didn't
fight back hard enough against
the 2009 coup
there that has deposed its
president.
In Haiti, there's a lot of
people upset over
the way that the Clinton
Foundation has handled
reconstruction money following
the earthquake
there. And there's all sorts of
problems around
the region about the
militarization that the
U.S. has pushed in the region to
fight against
the drug war.
So there is a lot of concern
about her specifically.
But, trust me, you ask anybody
down there
Hillary or Donald, and it's a
very clear choice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's very
unfair to ask
all three of you to condense the
views of
the entire world in just a few
minutes, but
we do appreciate your giving us
your insights.
Joyce Karam, Geoff Dyer, Alan
Gomez, we thank
you, all three.
GEOFF DYER: Thank you.
ALAN GOMEZ: Thank you.
JOYCE KARAM: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's been just
over a month
since a major earthquake
devastated swathes
of countryside and towns on
Ecuador's Pacific
coast; 663 people are officially
confirmed
dead.
And, as thousands more face the
loss of their
homes or workplace, videographer
Bruno Federico
and special correspondent Nadja
Drost bring
us this report from Manabi
province on Ecuador's
coast, where people are trying
to rebuild
their towns and lives.
ALFREDO JAMA, Fisherman (through
translator):
That night was unforgettable. I
was bringing
up the net, when, suddenly, I
felt the boat
vibrating too much. It was like
the floor
burst open.
NADJA DROST: It's the first time
that fisherman
Alfredo Jama has dared to return
out to sea
since an earthquake caught him
by surprise
on April 16th when he was
fishing.
ALFREDO JAMA (through
translator): When I
looked around, I saw an
explosion that left
us without light. Everything was
dark. The
sea bellowed from beneath. It
was like there
was a beast coming up from
under. When I returned
to the house, everything was a
disaster.
NADJA DROST: Jama's wife, Paola
Farias, walked
us through what used to be the
two-story home
of their extended family, which
she also used
for her nail salon.
PAOLA FARIAS, Salon Owner
(through translator):
When I said, don't worry, it's
over, was when
the movement started more
strongly. The walls
started falling. We managed to
leave the house.
It was terrible, because imagine
how one works
so hard for one's things, and
from one moment
to another, nothing.
NADJA DROST: Farias is one of at
least 250,000
Ecuadorians directly affected by
an earthquake
that knocked down thousands of
buildings.
It also set off an outpouring of
support from
fellow Ecuadorians, like Karla
Morales, the
director of local human rights
group Kahre.
She was at home in the city of
Guayaquil,
over 150 miles south of the
epicenter, the
night the quake hit.
KARLA MORALES, Kahre: And in
that moment,
I just sent a tweet.
NADJA DROST: "Bring supplies to
my house tomorrow,"
Karla wrote, and she'd drive
them north to
the earthquake-affected region
the next afternoon.
KARLA MORALES: And I didn't
expect that people
were so interested in helping
and with so
much compassion and solidarity.
There were
like 600 or maybe 1,000 people
in my house,
bringing help and helping with
all that donations
that we were receiving in that
moment.
NADJA DROST: Karla ended up
sending 23 large
truckloads of materials that
day. Since then,
her team continues to distribute
donations,
from water filters to
mattresses, to rural
areas, where help has been
slower to reach.
Ecuador hadn't expected an
earthquake, but
preparing for a different
emergency, a volcanic
eruption and flooding, helped it
respond quickly,
says Tim Callaghan of USAID.
TIM CALLAGHAN, USAID: Many of
the countries
in this region, Peru, and
Paraguay, and including
Ecuador, obviously were planning
for potential
negative impacts from El Nino
flooding. Thankfully,
that hasn't been as severe as
was forecast,
but it did force Ecuador and
other countries
to plan for emergencies.
NADJA DROST: And that meant
Ecuador's government
already had a certain level of
resilience
and emergency coordination to
activate search-and-rescue
and channel aid to people, he
told us.
After getting frozen out of
Ecuador two years
ago for political reasons, USAID
is one of
many international groups
sending experts
in. The U.S. has donated nearly
$3 million
of humanitarian aid towards
relief efforts.
The needs are still great.
Callaghan points
to water, sanitation and shelter
as the most
pressing.
Over 28,000 people are living in
shelters,
most run by the military. Others
are living
in parks or makeshift refuges,
where aid is
harder to come by. Its scarcity
led to this
near brawl in Manta after people
outside the
neighborhood tried to claim
rations.
But as it looks towards renewal,
Ecuador first
has to ask some tough questions
over why the
destruction was so extensive. As
municipal
employees in the city of
Portoviejo fly drones
to evaluate the damages, they
reveal a devastating
picture of what went wrong.
And that's a lot, says Patricio
Velez, the
head of territorial development
for the city
of Portoviejo.
PATRICIO VELEZ, Head of
Territorial Development,
Portoviejo (through translator):
There was
a lot of informality,
constructions without
permits. People would add on a
third floor.
It took us by surprise. There
were new buildings
that collapsed and old ones that
stood up.
NADJA DROST: Ecuador is used to
plenty of
small quakes, and its building
code has developed
over the years to include
seismic considerations,
says Jaime Argudo, a structural
engineer.
But he says that up to 85
percent of buildings
are constructed without planning
for an earthquake.
JAIME ARGUDO, Structural
Engineer: There is
also a major issue in our
country, and many
countries around the world, that
building
codes are not properly enforced.
NADJA DROST: Now the
consequences of poor
building materials and
construction are devastatingly
obvious.
In Portoviejo, a city of 300,000
people, the
area hit hardest by the
earthquake was also
the city's economic center and
downtown. Here,
in what's being called the
city's ground zero,
everything is shut down.
Two-thirds of buildings
inspected so far are either
collapsed, or
severely damaged, and demolition
is in full
swing. Now, this battered city
faces rebuilding
its economy, and its future.
As Velez points to how much of
ground zero
will be leveled, he also sees a
clean slate,
an opportunity for Portoviejo to
reinvent
itself and become more
resilient.
PATRICIO VELEZ (through
translator): The city
grew in a disorderly fashion,
without planning.
We should take advantage of this
moment now.
NADJA DROST: But to carry out
new urban plans
and reconstruction across the
region will
take big money, just as
Ecuador's economy
struggles against plummeting oil
prices.
President Rafael Correa, an
economist, estimated
it could cost $3 billion. As he
surveyed the
damages of a neighborhood
outside of Manta,
we asked how he plans to make
that happen.
RAFAEL CORREA, President of
Ecuador (through
translator): We have a
contingency loan from
the World Bank and the IDB for
over $600 million.
We will probably reach over a
billion, and
we have taken a line of credit
that will give
us another billion dollars. If
all the lines
of credit work out, we will have
over $2 billion
for reconstruction. However, I
think we're
going to need more, but for the
short term,
it's a significant amount.
NADJA DROST: The government has
taken several
special measures, such as
raising the national
sales tax and getting
higher-income earners
to forego part of their salary,
to build up
earthquake recovery funds.
Some communities have already
had to rebuild
following a natural disaster.
Here in the
town of San Vicente, Farias and
Jama's house
was first destroyed by an
earthquake in 1998.
After they rebuilt it, floods
from El Nino
washed it away.
PAOLA FARIAS (through
translator): And now,
it fell, including the roof.
Three disasters
have happened to us, and thank
God we're alive,
and we have to keep going and
start rebuilding.
NADJA DROST: But recovery will
take more than
reconstruction. reviving local
economies and
people's livelihoods is a
pressing challenge,
yet slow to realize. But in
trying to figure
out how, many residents are
thinking bigger,
says Morales.
KARLA MORALES: I think this has
been an earthquake
that destroyed houses, but
rebuilt minds.
In the suffering, they are very
hopeful. They
are like, teach me. I want to
learn something
else.
NADJA DROST: While many look for
new ways
to make a living, others want to
restart their
business. For Farias, that was
her nail salon.
PAOLA FARIAS (through
translator): When the
house fell, you had to survive,
one way or
another. When I saw there was
something left
of my business, I decided, OK, I
will start
from zero. And here we are.
NADJA DROST: Farias and her
family want to
move to a new lot. It appears
they already
know how to rebuild.
From Manabi province in Ecuador,
reporting
with Bruno Federico, I'm Nadja
Drost for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: On our Web site,
learn about
a special mapping project that's
helping in
Ecuador's relief effort.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Making Sense
of patent trolls. Are they
protecting or stifling
innovation? The launch of a
brand-new musical
variety show. And a comedian's
take on why
people should pay for the media
they consume.
But first: a sobering new
development with
superbugs and public health
concerns about
the limited effect of
antibiotics.
For the first time in the U.S.,
a person has
been found to be carrying a
strain of E. coli
that's resistant to antibiotics
of last resort.
The Washington Post reported the
strain was
discovered last month in a
49-year-old Pennsylvania
woman. She was resistant to
Colistin. And
researchers said it -- quote --
"heralds the
emergence of a truly
pan-drug-resistant bacteria."
Dr. Beth Bell is with the
Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. And she
is now working
with Pennsylvania officials.
She's the director
of the National Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic
Infectious Diseases.
Thanks for joining us.
First, how -- what is so
distinct about these
findings?
DR. BETH BELL, Director,
National Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious
Diseases:
Colistin is an antibiotic that
we have already
had for quite a long time, but
we use it as
a last line.
So, it's our drug of last
resort. And so when
patients are infected with some
of these superbugs
that we have talked about
before, where the
strain is resistant to pretty
much every antibiotic,
we rely on Colistin as the last
resort.
And what we find here in this
patient, the
bacteria that infected this
patient, is that
her strain contains one of these
mobile genes
that confers resistance to
Colistin. So, because
bacteria can spread these mobile
genes among
themselves, it sets off a
situation where
we can see a bacteria that's
resistant to
every known antibiotic. And, of
course, that
is a very frightening prospect
for all of
us.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right.
So, when I am go to the
pharmacy, and I'm
prescribed something like
azithromycin or
something, it's pretty low on
the scale of
the arsenal that doctors have.
So, this is
the top end. There is nothing
after this.
That means that the patient is
untreatable,
and that means there is a, what,
greater chance
that they might die because of
this?
DR. BETH BELL: Sure.
There's -- we luckily haven't
seen actual
bacteria that are resistant to
every single
antibiotic here in the United
States. But
there are reports of this in
other parts of
the world, and these patients
have a very
high mortality rate. It's
extremely difficult
to treat them. And, again, this
raises the
specter of a post-antibiotic
era.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
how do bugs
get this strong?
DR. BETH BELL: You know,
bacteria are just
really, really smart. Microbes
have learned
how to evolve over centuries and
centuries,
and they have a number of
different methods
for outwitting antibiotics.
And because, bacteria, they
reproduce so quickly,
by chance, sometimes there will
be a mutation
that allows a certain strain to
outwit an
antibiotic. And that, therefore,
means that
that bacteria grows
preferentially, and that's
how these bacteria develop
resistance.
And so, of course, that points
out the importance
of using antibiotics only at the
right time
and the right dose, because
overuse of antibiotics,
of course, can spur these
bacteria to develop
these resistance mechanisms.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But what can
we learn from
what happened to this specific
individual?
Right now, it's just one person,
but what
do we know? Do we know anything
about how
she contracted this or perhaps
if her immune
system was already suppressed?
DR. BETH BELL: We don't know
much yet about
how she contracted it. It
doesn't sound like
she's traveled outside the
United States,
but we don't have the kind of
really specific
information that we would like.
We're working directly with the
Pennsylvania
Department of Health right now
to do that
sort of in-depth investigation
that will help
us figure out why she might have
gotten it,
whether any of her household
contacts also
had the bacteria, and to just
give us the
kind of information that we need
about how
widespread the bacteria might be
in this particular
situation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Over the past
several months,
the CDC has been out talking
about so many
different types of infectious
diseases.
One on the hand, we have had
Ebola, and now
there's lot of concern about
Zika. This is
something completely different.
This isn't
the type of communicable disease
that I can
get by just being in the same
room with you,
right?
DR. BETH BELL: Yes.
Well, the mode of transmission
of different
-- of communicable diseases
varies by the
bacteria. But certainly with
some of these
superbug strains, we do see them
transmitted,
especially in health care
settings.
And that is why prevention
really is so important,
prevention in terms of
antibiotic stewardship,
using antibiotics correctly, and
infection
control, using the kinds of
strategies that
prevent environmental
contamination in hospitals
and spread of bacteria among
patients.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Dr.
Beth Bell
from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention,
thanks so much.
DR. BETH BELL: Thank you so much
for having
me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Patents are often
called the
building blocks of innovation.
But in recent
years, a broad fight over the
enforcement
of patents, and what should
qualify as a true
invention, has drawn players
from every corner,
inventors, lawyers, giant
technology and pharmaceutical
companies and universities.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman took a
look at the issue as part of his
weekly Making
Sense series, which airs every
Thursday on
the "NewsHour."
TODD MOORE, CEO, TMSOFT: So
here's Amazon
jungle.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's Todd Moore's
White Noise
mobile phone app, which
generates the call
of the wild, and pretty much any
other sound
you can think of, to lull the
sleep-challenged
to la-la land.
And this is frogs?
TODD MOORE: Yes. Don't you just
want to fall
asleep?
PAUL SOLMAN: I'm getting
slightly drowsy.
It was such a basic idea, Moore
didn't even
bother to apply for a patent.
And yet he himself
was sued for patent
infringement.
TODD MOORE: They were claiming a
hyperlink
inside the white noise app, that
you would
tap it and go to the Internet,
that was infringing
on one or more of their patents.
PAUL SOLMAN: But doesn't almost
every app
have a hyperlink of some sort?
TODD MOORE: Yes. If you're using
the Internet
it does, so how can they say
that's infringing
on a patent?
PAUL SOLMAN: And all they were
asking to go
away, $3,500. Welcome to the
world of so-called
patent trolls.
NARRATOR: A patent troll is
someone that makes
their money by filing frivolous
lawsuits against
companies, with the hope that
these companies
will pay a fee to settle, rather
than go to
court.
PAUL SOLMAN: The House Judiciary
Committee,
which put out this cartoon,
passed an anti-troll
bill last summer.
NARRATOR: They don't manufacture
anything.
They don't create jobs. Instead,
they're siphoning
money from companies that do.
It's nothing
more than legalized extortion.
PAUL SOLMAN: The company suing
Moore was Lodsys.
When we called for comment, a
phone number
for its CEO was disconnected,
its Web site
domain name no longer operative.
In its prime, though, the
company was what's
known as a non-practicing
entity, or NPE,
because it didn't create
inventions of its
own. It amassed those of others
and sued,
a common practice for years now.
And the numbers
show the scope. About two-thirds
of all patent
lawsuits in district court last
year were
filed by non-practicing
entities.
TODD MOORE: It's happening all
the time, and
there's nothing we can do about
it. We just
have to write them a check, so
they will go
away
PAUL SOLMAN: So this is like a
WeWork?
Certainly, Moore, who had only
three employees
at the time, couldn't afford to
stop them
in court. But he lucked into a
pro bono lawyer
spoiling for a troll fight. So,
when Lodsys
asked for its measly $3,500...
TODD MOORE: I said no. And then
they came
back and said, well, would you
pay us $2,000?
And I said no. And then they
came back and
said, what will you pay? And I
said nothing.
And they said, OK, we will take
that, as long
as you promise not to sue us,
which that's
not my business model. That's
theirs.
LAUREN COHEN, Harvard Business
School: So,
our patent and patent
enforcement system has
gotten to the brink of no
return.
PAUL SOLMAN: Harvard Business
School professor
Lauren Cohen has studied the
economic impact
of trolls.
LAUREN COHEN: This is an
overused phrase.
The future of the U.S. economy
depends on
this. Right? You will hear
people say the
future of the U.S. economy
depends on seashells
or on pickles, right? But the
future of the
U.S. economy really does depend
on innovation.
PAUL SOLMAN: And yet shakedown
artists may
be putting the squeeze on
America's innovators.
CHIP HARRIS, Acacia Research:
We're in this
business to make money.
PAUL SOLMAN: Chip Harris is
director of Acacia
Research, a decidedly
non-practicing entity,
which started out as a venture
capital firm,
investing in the V-chip, a
parental control
technology for TV sets.
When it didn't sell, Acacia
decided to use
the V-chip patent it owned to
sue TV makers
who, it claimed, had applied the
idea without
paying for it. And pay, they
eventually did.
Ever since, Acacia's business
has been, says
Harris, to protect patent
owners.
CHIP HARRIS: Some of the big
companies out
there have done a wonderful job
of reframing
the argument. And they say,
well, you're a
non-practicing entity or you're
a patent troll.
To me, it's a little bit like
saying, well,
if you built your house, you can
rent it.
But if you bought it from
somebody else, you
can't rent it.
PAUL SOLMAN: So is Acacia a
patent protector
or a patent troll?
And how many books have you got
here?
JAY WALKER, Walker Innovation:
About 25,000.
PAUL SOLMAN: What about an even
bigger player,
Jay Walker, whose practicing
company, Priceline,
fully protected by patents, made
him a fortune?
Walker's Library of the History
of Human Imagination
at his Connecticut home is a
world-class museum
featuring the inventions of the
past.
JAY WALKER: This is one of the
few surviving
working Enigma machines in the
world.
PAUL SOLMAN: He even showed me
the famous
Nazi invention whose code the
Brits helped
crack in World War II, made
famous again recently
by the movie "The Imitation
Game."
ACTOR: It's beautiful.
ACTOR: It's the greatest
encryption device
in history and the Germans use
it for all
communications.
PAUL SOLMAN: Walker's own
invention record
is none too shabby. He's named
on more than
500 U.S. and international
patents. But for
protecting them, by filing suit
against Microsoft,
Google, Apple, Sony, and others,
for infringement,
he's been called a patent troll,
slander,
he says.
JAY WALKER: People want to say,
well, he took
me to court, he shouldn't have
taken me to
court. He's a troll. What I
really want to
do is to say to somebody, look,
you're using
my patent. Pay me a reasonable
license, and
we're done.
PAUL SOLMAN: But are all of
Walker's patents
themselves reasonable? Or, as
has been alleged,
were some invented just to cash
in on the
eventual practical innovations
of others?
I can imagine people saying,
yes, so he writes
out all kinds of possible
inventions, that
then he figures somebody else
will eventually
actually use, so then he can
say, hey, wait
a second, I invented that first.
JAY WALKER: America is not a
country where
you have to invent things and
then bring them
to market. If you have a working
requirement
where everything you invent you
have to do
in order to keep your patent,
then you will
never have a group of inventors
inventing
things that they want others to
do.
LAUREN COHEN: Patent trolling is
chasing cash
indiscriminate of infringement.
PAUL SOLMAN: Professor Cohen
takes no position
on Jay Walker or Acacia. But
just look, he
says, at dusty Marshall, Texas,
teeming with
mailboxes for patent troll
firms. More than
43 percent of 2015 patent cases
were filed
in the Eastern District of
Texas.
LAUREN COHEN: Marshall, Texas,
is definitely
not a hotbed of U.S. innovation.
And so what's
bringing the NPEs there? Well,
two things
really. So, they try cases
quicker than other
places, and that's because of a
few administrative
rules that they put in place.
And they rule
in favor of NPEs more than
anywhere else.
PAUL SOLMAN: So what, if
anything, should
be done? Enact that bill passed
by the House
Judiciary Committee? It would
toughen requirements
for filing patent challenges in
court, could
make plaintiffs pay the legal
bills of defendants
if a claim's considered
unreasonable.
However, the bill has yet to see
a vote on
the House floor. Same with a
similar bill
in the Senate. At a conference,
the head of
the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office, Michelle
Lee, said changes to the law can
help and
that past changes already have,
letting her
office hire more examiners to
improve the
quality of the patents it
issues.
MICHELLE LEE, Director, U.S.
Patent and Trademark
Office: All this discussion
about abusive
patent litigation, it is even
more important
for us to issue patents that
should issue
and not to issue patents that
shouldn't, because
there's a cost both ways.
PAUL SOLMAN: And ever since his
run-in with
Lodsys, developer Todd Moore,
himself named
on a handful of patents, has
pushed for reform.
TODD MOORE: I believe in having
a strong patent
system, but what I don't believe
in is just
suing everybody without actually
building
anything, without helping
people, without
helping society in any way.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent Paul
Solman, likely
to sleep more soundly tonight,
unless I start
thinking about the patent
system, that is.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now: A new
music variety
show debuts on PBS, set in a
club with quite
a legacy in rock and alternative
music.
Jeffrey Brown explains.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's called "Live
at 9:30,"
and live is important. This is a
musical variety
show aimed at giving viewers an
experience
as close as possible to being at
a rock 'n'
roll show.
Unlike the much-loved "Austin
City Limits,"
now 40-plus-years old, each
hour-long episode
of "Live At 9:30" will feature
performances
by several groups, old and new.
The first
includes Garbage, a band formed
in Madison,
Wisconsin in 1993, Ibeyi, a
French-Cuban sister
act, and Yonder Mountain String
Band.
There are also behind-the-scenes
interviews,
and short sketches from popular
comedians
like Hannibal Buress.
HANNIBAL BURESS, Comedian: Who'd
freestyle
better, Donald Trump or Hillary
Clinton?
JEFFREY BROWN: The setting for
all this, the
9:30 Club in Washington, D.C.,
SETH HURWITZ, Co-Owner, 9:30
Club: When you
want is, when that band that
goes on the stage,
you want the band and the
audience not to
be thinking about anything else.
JEFFREY BROWN: Seth Hurwitz is
the club's
co-owner, and has made it into
one of rock
music's best venues. Over the
years, it's
hosted the already famous Bob
Dylan, Prince
and Dave Grohl and those on the
rise, Sonic
Youth, Psychedelic Furs and
Fugazi, just to
name a few.
"Rolling Stone" magazine dubbed
it number
one big room, best sound, best
backstage.
And "Billboard" has named it top
club 11 times.
Now Hurwitz wants to reach a
larger audience.
SETH HURWITZ: When I grew up, we
watched "The
Midnight Special" or "In
Concert," or, in
the old days, "American
Bandstand."
I really wanted an "Ed Sullivan"
kind of show,
because that was fun, right?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
SETH HURWITZ: So, we really are
curating this
for everyone. I have this
fantasy vision of
three generations sitting around
at the couch
because "Live at 9:30" is coming
on.
JEFFREY BROWN: One performer in
the new series
is three-time Grammy winner Ben
Harper, known
for his mix of blues, soul,
reggae, and rock.
He's played here often with his
band Innocent
Criminals.
BEN HARPER, Musician: The 9:30
Club was build
to plug in and go. It's made for
modern music.
There's not a bad seat in the
house.
It's just -- the wraparound
balcony is always
a great rush. Music-first venues
are some
of my favorite worldwide. You
can tell by
their archive here as well. It's
music first.
It represents one of the best
aspects of the
human experience. And I think
music preservation
is as critical a cultural
component as science.
JEFFREY BROWN: On our visit,
crews set up
for Harper's act, placing a
dozen cameras
around the venue to create a
you-are-there
experience for the viewer.
After the sound check, Harper
did a short
interview for the TV show. A
portion of his
live show will be featured in a
coming episode.
BOB BOILEN, Author, "Your Song
Changed My
Life": This club, you talk to
any artist who
comes through here, they love it
here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Bob Boilen is
best known today
as host of NPR's "All Songs
Considered" and
"Tiny Desk Concerts."
He's also a musician, and used
to perform
at the 9:30 Club in its early
years. He's
now serving as one of the
rotating hosts on
"Live At 9:30."
BOB BOILEN: A lot of people when
they have
families, for whatever reason,
they lose the
thread of music that was
important to them,
because they can't get out,
everything from
baby-sitters to exhaustion.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right. Life
happens.
BOB BOILEN: Life. Life happens.
The nice thing about the show is
that you
will get a variety. You might
like three of
the four things, or -- and then
you get a
little mix of comedy in there.
So, you can't
like everything as a viewer, but
if you could
understand who these people are,
you make
a connection with them, even if
you don't
like the music, you understand
why they make
their music, why they do what
they do.
JEFFREY BROWN: More than 40
bands have already
been recorded to weave into the
series, something
for everyone.
Live at the 9:30 Club in
Washington, D.C.,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: The 12-episode
season will
air on PBS stations in June.
Check your local
listings.
Online, Seth Hurwitz takes Jeff
to the basement
of the 9:30 Club to discuss the
early days
of the music scene there. Plus,
we have five
tips on how to take great photos
at the next
concert you attend.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, another
installment
in our Brief But Spectacular
series, where
we ask interesting people to
describe their
passions.
Tonight, we hear from performer
Tim Heidecker,
best known for his part in the
absurdist comedy
duo of Tim & Eric. His latest
record, "In
Glendale," was released last
week.
Here he lays out why we should
pay for entertainment
we get online.
MDNM-TIM HEIDECKER, Performer:
Hello, friends.
My name is Tim Heidecker. You
may not know
me, but I'm sure you have seen
me.
If you have ever seen the film
"Bridesmaids,"
I play the groom in the film,
very -- I think
I have one line in the movie.
Your kids might know me from
"Tim & Eric Awesome
Show, Great Job!" and a number
of other Tim
& Eric related projects.
People describe our show as
absurd, offensive,
disgusting, anti-comedy, which
is something
I don't believe in. We're trying
to make people
laugh, and sometimes that
doesn't work out.
I'm bit of a Twitter addict. I
tend to have
this bad habit of engaging only
in people
that hate me and my work. I want
to take them
out for dinner and get to the
bottom of where
all that anger is coming from.
A got a tweet the other day from
a gentlemen
who said, your "Awesome Show" is
not awesome,
and I regret having BitTorrented
it, which
is otherwise known as illegally
downloading.
And it's little bit like going
into a motorcycle
shop and stealing a motorcycle,
and driving
it back and saying you don't
care for the
way it hums or something,
whatever motorcycles
do.
For a lot of kids, it's so easy
to just hit
this button and you immediately
get this thing.
And you can get whatever you
want. We work
with costume designers and set
decorators
and cinematographers and editors
and producers,
and people that we like to pay,
because they
like to eat.
There's a trickle-down effect.
When you stop
paying for the content at the
end, you can
-- you have to stop paying
people to make
it in the beginning.
When you pay for something,
those people get
to have livings. And we should
support that.
Hi. This is Tim Heidecker, and
this is my
Brief But Spectacular take on
why people should
pay for things. And this is not
a PBS pledge
drive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
sure to like
you on Twitter.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
more videos
in our Brief But Spectacular
series on our
Web site. That's at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And next week,
Gwen Ifill
will host a "NewsHour" special
that you don't
want to miss. Take a look.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in Wednesday
for a "PBS NewsHour"
special, speaking with the
president to have
the United States.
I'm Gwen Ifill. Join me in
Elkhart, Indiana,
for a town hall with President
Obama, from
the economy, to fighting terror,
to who will
succeed him in the Oval Office.
Everything
is on the table. That's June 1
at 8:00 p.m.,
7:00 Central, only on PBS.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight. I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're all going
to be watching
that.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.